Bulk Synchronous Standards (#69)
SPSCommerce/sps-api-standards: standards/bulk.md

# Bulk Operations

> ## Overview

Reviewer: Should the standards have an opinion on transnationality of the bulk operation?  For instance if we wanted to create all or none of the resources in the bulk request.

Author: That is a very good question! I think there should be an option for that. But some of that is dependent on the answer to how we treat the atomicity of the PATCH request in general. If we move ahead with that direct interpretation than its implied here, no such thing as partial success. All or nothing from a transaction point of view.

Reviewer: Another consideration might be how we deal with that transaction across multiple bulk requests.

Author: Yep to clarify we need to answer too questions here:
1. Is a bulk PATCH request atomic, and all operations act as a single transaction to succeed or fail together? (inline with expected PATCH RFC). 
2. Is bulk  PATCH request atomicity a setting that can be passed as a parameter if needed?
3. Do we need a method to handle "paging" bulk requests that require atomicity across multiple requests (multiple requests as a single transaction)?

Author: 1. Added parameter and default to control atomicity vs isolated transactions.
2. Added.
3. No paging between requests and no atomicity between requests... its out of scope.

The concept of bulk operations on RESTful endpoints is quite foreign, in the sense that it is not a common practice. However, there are some use cases where it makes sense to allow a client to perform multiple operations in a single request. For example, a client may want to create multiple entities at once, or update multiple entities at once. In these cases, it is often more efficient to allow the client to perform these operations in a single request, rather than making multiple requests. However, before adding support for bulk operations you should think twice if this feature is really needed. Often network performance is not what limits request throughput. Similarly, sending multiple in-parallel requests for standard REST endpoints can be a fine solution for some clients.

### Synchronous

> Bulk operations **MUST** be synchronous when applied to an existing resource. This means that the client will receive a response to the bulk request only after all operations have been completed. This is in contrast to asynchronous operations, where the client receives a response immediately after the request is received, and then must poll for the result of the operation. Asynchronous bulk operations are applied to new resources specifically for bulk or import to enable subsequent status updates through additional endpoints.

Reviewer 2: Why are asynchronous requests for existing entities prohibited? Consider scenarios where the user doesn't need to wait like archiving documents.

Author: That would be part of async operations against an inherently different resource that would enable polling or webhooks.

Reviewer 2: Why is asynchronous allowed for creating resources but prohibited for existing resources? I don't understand why they are treated differently.

Author: I'm not sure I understand why they wouldn't be treated differently. Are you proposing in general that all resources can be interacted with ASYNC or SYNC?

Reviewer 2: I suggest allowing async and/or sync for all bulk operations. It may make sense to only support one or the other but I don't see why async update should be prohibited.

Author: I'm gathering further details first on expectations for ASYNC pattern which will affect the answer here. Currently, though the expectation is that this is NOT the pattern to be used for async communication.

> - Bulk operations **MUST** be specific to a single resource type and NOT allow for updating multiple resource types in a single request.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/SPSCommerce/wfds/tree/main/docs/endpoints#docactionbatch supports multiple action types (listed at https://github.com/SPSCommerce/wfds/tree/main/docs/endpoints#type)
The different actions are all on documents. Does that conflict with this?

Author: Another reference: https://github.com/SPSCommerce/network-configuration-service/blob/main/docs/api/BATCH.md

Yep this would be in conflict... we need to decide if we are looking for a bluk operations endpoint that does many resources and is generic across or is intended to be specific to a resource with a static resource definition.

Reviewer 2: The WFDS example is all for the same resource type but does allow different actions on each entity. I don't know of a reason that we have to support that besides that it is easier to support lets endpoints.

Author: Thats helpful context, thanks James!

> - Bulk operations **MUST** be implemented as a PATCH request against a collection resource.

Reviewer 2: What about bulk retrieval with GET or bulk DELETE?

> - Bulk operations **MUST** return a `200 (OK)` response code if all operations were received and a result is available for each operation, regardless of success. Bulk operations **MUST NOT** use status code `207 (Multi-Status)` response code as this incurs other implications for the response schema in relationship to Web DAV.

Reviewer 2: Are there exceptions like all actions having a system problem and returning a 500?

Author: for system level exceptions not related to each individual operation, yes I think a 500 in that case is expected. I'll make a note.

- Bulk operations **MUST** accept a constrained number of operations in the request body that is indicated in the documentation of the endpoint. By default this value **MAY** be 100 operations, but should be adjusting according to the needs of the endpoint and the entity-size. Requests beyond the limit **MUST** return a `400` response code and standard [error format body](errors.md) similar to:
```
// RESPONSE
HTTP/1.1 400
Content-Type: application/problem+json
{
    "title": "Invalid Data",
    "status": 400,
    "detail": "Operations collection may only contain a maximum of '100' actions per request.",
    "instance": "/articles",
    "requestId": "b6d9a290-9f20-465b-bcd3-4a5166eeb3d7"
}
```

- Bulk operations **MUST** include a request body schema following: 
```json
{
    "operations": [
        {

>             "action": "CREATE" | "UPDATE" | "CREATE_UPDATE" | "DELETE",     // indicate intent of operation

Author: thoughts on these actions and terms used? do we need a "CREATE_UPDATE" regularly"

Reviewer 3: Sounds like we may need a `FETCH` (or something like that) as well.

Author: Since this is resource specific why would you use the bulk PATCH endpoint to fetch instead of the normal GET request? Unless I am misunderstanding what you mean by FETCH?

Reviewer: This may be outside the scope of this PR but, with Items API `/items/views/lookup` endpoint we are using an "intelligent" or "contextual" search.  This was sort of modeled after Rules Managements `/types/{id}/rules/instances/evaluate` endpoint.  Both of with are POSTs and they perform a query on a set of resources that can't be modeled (or at least not efficiently) by FIQL.  This is a pattern that we might want to elsewhere like the new Objects API.

So as it relates to this PR, we may want to do a bulk "lookup" of Items.  This falls somewhere between an action and a GET.  I don't remember the API design review discussion around the `/lookup` endpoint so I might be missing some context.

https://app.swaggerhub.com/apis/spscommerce/items-api/1.0.510#/Item%20Views/item-views-lookup

Reviewer 4: In the Rules Management case, I think it was made a POST because it wasn't a strict drill down filter like you'd do in a normal GET, and there were some validation requirements on the inputs. GET endpoints can only have optional query parameters, so we used a POST request body.

But yeah, to your point, it's also kind of an action that happens to return a collection of results?

Reviewer 5: CREATE_UPDATE (or "upsert") is a fairly common action, I'd say.

Author: Core question to answer - can we just use GET for bulk retrieval... should this support that too?
No concerns in recognizing that the references you have Nick/Evan are likely outside of this pattern and intentionally so.

Reviewer 6: I would expect bulk retrieval to be covered by FIQL `=in=` on the collection endpoint of some resource.

Reviewer: FIQL doesn't really fit the use case we're describing, however it should be sufficient in a general bulk retrieval.  As discussed in the review, bulk operations of actions will not be supported as they represent a different use case.

Reviewer: It is still not clear to me if we are say that an API _must_ support _every_ action "CREATE" | "UPDATE" | "CREATE_UPDATE" | "DELETE" or that it _can_ support _any_ of these actions.

Author: We will not allow extension of the ENUMS, but usage of a subset is appropriate. I will document accordingly.

>             "action": "CREATE" | "UPDATE" | "CREATE_UPDATE" | "DELETE",     // indicate intent of operation

Reviewer 2: Can others be added if needed? If there is an update, do the details go under entity?

Author: What others would we need ? you thinking of custom operations for an API? Ideally the answer would be no... but I'd love to hear some of the use cases...

Reviewer 2: I can't think of any to add right now.

            "ifMatch": "string" | null,                                     // if-match is an optional ETag that can be passed for optimistic concurrency
            "entity": {
                ... MATCHING ENTITY...                                      // must match entity schema resource from the collection
            }                                                               // schema on entity is static and not dynamic
        },
    ]
}
```

- Bulk operations **MUST** include a response body schema following:
```json
{
    "status": "SUCCEEDED" | "FAILED" | "PARTIAL",                           // overall status of bulk operation, partial indicating 
    "operations": [                                                         // there are some operations that failed and succeeded
        {

>             "ordinal": 0,                                                   // position in original ordered operation collection

Reviewer 2: Since operations is an array, at already has a position.

Author: there is no guarantee that the parsing language is preserving order of the collection. Having the explicit reference seems helpful and not bothersome to those that ignore it.

            "action": "CREATE" | "UPDATE" | "CREATE_UPDATE" | "DELETE",     // repeat action type
            "id": "string" | null,                                          // the associated id of the entity, if available
            "ref": "sps-ref" | null,                                        // the associated sps-ref URN entity, if applicable
            "status": "SUCCEEDED" | "FAILED",                               // status of individual operation

>             "detail": "string",                                             // indicates details on the operation result, such as a error message.

Reviewer 3: For the `FETCH` mentioned above, would we maybe want to go for `data`, as well?  Something that might be api dependent.  In the (possible) Item Bulk Lookup it would generically be an `object`.  Maybe we'd want a `schema` ref in those cases 🤔

Author: FETCH will be out of scope for this purpose.

>             "detail": "string",                                             // indicates details on the operation result, such as a error message.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            "detail": "string",                                             // indicates details on the operation result, such as an error message.
```

>             "detail": "string",                                             // indicates details on the operation result, such as a error message.

Reviewer 2: Can a detail structure be used?

Author: Yep that proposal is coming soon.

        }
    ]
}
```

The following example demonstrates various operations in a bulk request and response:

```
// REQUEST
PATCH /articles
Content-Type: application/json
{
    "operations": [
        {
            "action": "CREATE_UPDATE"

>             "ifMatch": "33a64df551425fcc55e4d42a148795d9f25f89d4",

Author: Is it a need to handle optimistic concurrency in bulk? seems relevant... but an etag for each entity is necessary then. Should this field name match the "If-Match" header or just call it "etag"?

Reviewer 4: And an extra wrinkle that it doesn't apply in every scenario, such as CREATE. (Maybe also not in DELETE either, unless standards changed there since I last looked?)

I like the idea of feature parity as if you called these all individually, though.

Author: I assumed it was an optional field not required, so don't provide on create. It would apply to DELETE if you wanted it too? Was there a specific callout on why not to use an if-match on delete if you needed it?

Reviewer 4: I just wasn't sure what our standards said. I thought it was just a PUT/PATCH thing. DELETE could make sense, but I don't know if that's part of what we say you should be doing. 🤷‍♂️

Reviewer 3: I like this.  It's a good catch to notice it and include it.
Do we only support if-match and etags?  Isn't there a version for date/time, as well?  do our standards ignore that?

Author: > DELETE could make sense, but I don't know if that's part of what we say you should be doing.
If someone wanted to ensure concurrency when they DELETED something I have no problem with the DELETE accepting the `if-match` header. I don't think that is outside the api standards. Use case specific.

> Do we only support if-match and etags? Isn't there a version for date/time, as well? do our standards ignore that?
We have only so far supported ETags... is there something specific you had in mind for the version of this with date/time? Is it worth investigating further? I can see that being something we easily add later if we wanted to more holistically support it. But have not used it to date that I'm aware of...

            "entity": {
                "id": "bfd8f0c0-be67-4f81-bf82-e55e552609f4",
                "name": "my name",
                "description": "my description"
            }
        },
        {
            "action": "CREATE"  
            "entity": {
                "id": null,
                "name": "my name",
                "description": "my description"
            }
        },
        {
            "action": "DELETE" 
            "ifMatch": "44a64df551425fcc55e4d42a148795d9f25f89c5",     
            "entity": {

>                 "id": "d9bd5d91-fc25-4410-ae42-c8f631e8e9ff",

Reviewer 4: What is the expectation here if the user sends the same entity in the `operations` list multiple times?

Should the API honor the operations in order? Should it reject the request and only allow a single operation per entity?

                "name": null,
                "description": null
            }
        },
    ]
}
 
// RESPONSE
200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
{
    "status": "PARTIAL",                                 
    "operations": [
        {
            "ordinal": 0,
            "action": "CREATE_UPDATE",
            "id": "bfd8f0c0-be67-4f81-bf82-e55e552609f4",
            "ref": "sps:...",
            "status": "SUCCEEDED",                         

>             "detail": "Article was updated.",  

Author: Should this detail actually match something like the error format to allow for a list of possible issues on creation? should there be another "error" field that is a representation of the error format in its verbose details?

Reviewer 4: I like the idea of having a full error object in here to have symmetry with calling things individually. But I'm not really sure how elegant that would be in terms of response schema here, though. By allowing partial success the schema has to kind of be lowest common denominator and have a place for both success and failure that co-exist but are probably mutually-exclusive on a particular item in the list. 🤔

Reviewer 2: Should success and error detail be separate?

Author: going to combine into one detail with a complex object.

        },
        {
            "ordinal": 1,
            "action": "CREATE",
            "id": null,

>             "ref": null,

Author: should ref be included here as a standard part of this entity?

Reviewer 3: That would make sense to me.  Is it optional (i.e. doesn't need to be included)?

Author: It would be optional part of the schema for sure, to be included for resources that support Refs.

Author: Updated to `entityRef` and is optional.

            "status": "FAILED",                         
            "detail": "Could not create article, since the name already exists.",  
        },
        {
            "ordinal": 2,
            "action": "DELETE",
            "id": "d9bd5d91-fc25-4410-ae42-c8f631e8e9ff",
            "ref": "sps:...",
            "status": "SUCCEEDED",                         

>             "detail": null,  

Author: can the entire response payload be generic? or do we need to allow for additional extensions?

Reviewer 2: I think it is likely that sometimes more detail would be useful.

Author: By more detail do you mean with regards to the "detail" field? or allow for extensions (other fields)?

Reviewer 2: I think allowing a structure under detail should be sufficient.

Author: Moving to a proposed fully opinionated detail object. Coming soon.

        }
    ]
}
```

```note
**PATCH REQUEST ATOMICITY**

> While the [HTTP PATCH RFC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5789) requires full atomicity in application of the patched document, this is not possible in the case of bulk operations. In the case of bulk operations, the request body is a collection of resources which means that the request body is not a single document. While not a perfect interpretation of PATCH execution, the boundaries of bulk operations require some compromise to benefit developer experience and consistency.

Author: how true is this? how confident are we? https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5789
```
A PATCH request can be issued in such a way as to be idempotent,
   which also helps prevent bad outcomes from collisions between two
   PATCH requests on the same resource in a similar time frame.
   Collisions from multiple PATCH requests may be more dangerous than
   PUT collisions because some patch formats need to operate from a
   known base-point or else they will corrupt the resource.  Clients
   using this kind of patch application SHOULD use a conditional request
   such that the request will fail if the resource has been updated
   since the client last accessed the resource.  For example, the client
   can use a strong ETag [[RFC2616](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2616)] in an If-Match header on the PATCH
   request.

   There are also cases where patch formats do not need to operate from
   a known base-point (e.g., appending text lines to log files, or non-
   colliding rows to database tables), in which case the same care in
   client requests is not needed.

   The server MUST apply the entire set of changes atomically and never
   provide (e.g., in response to a GET during this operation) a
   partially modified representation.  If the entire patch document
   cannot be successfully applied, then the server MUST NOT apply any of
   the changes.  The determination of what constitutes a successful
   PATCH can vary depending on the patch document and the type of
   resource(s) being modified.  For example, the common 'diff' utility
   can generate a patch document that applies to multiple files in a
   directory hierarchy.  The atomicity requirement holds for all
   directly affected files.  See "Error Handling", [Section 2.2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5789#section-2.2), for
   details on status codes and possible error conditions.
```

While odd, JSON Patch also abides by this atomicity and respects the HTTP PATCH (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6902/). But it really is how you interpret the payload here. Idempotency is not a requirement for PATCH (would be nice).

Author: We will be supporting both atomic and isolated transaction behavior with isolated being the default, regardless of the exact PATCH specification due to further implications.

- Bulk operations **MUST** accept a constrained number of operations in the request body that is indicated in the documentation of the endpoint. By default this value **MAY** be 100 operations, but should be adjusted according to the needs of the endpoint and the entity-size. Requests beyond the limit **MUST** return a `400` response code and standard [error format body](errors.md) similar to:
```json
// RESPONSE
HTTP/1.1 400
Content-Type: application/problem+json
{
    "title": "Invalid Data",
    "status": 400,
    "detail": "Operations collection may only contain a maximum of '100' actions per request.",
    "instance": "/articles",
    "requestId": "b6d9a290-9f20-465b-bcd3-4a5166eeb3d7"
}
```

#### Request

- Bulk operations **MUST** include a request body schema 
```json
{

>     "transaction": "ATOMIC" | "ISOLATED",                                   // default: "ATOMIC", optional. transactionality of the request

Reviewer 4: Formatting of this looks a bit strange 🤷‍♂️.

Default value is also in conflict with the paragraph below.
```suggestion
    "transaction": "ATOMIC" | "ISOLATED",                                   // optional transactionality of the request, default: "ISOLATED"
```

Author: nice! good callout.

    "operations": [                                                         
        {                                                                   
            "operationId": "string" | null,                                 // optional consumer generated id to associate with the operation for comparison to result.
            "action": "CREATE" | "UPDATE" | "CREATE_UPDATE" | "DELETE",     // indicate intent of operation (can use subset, but do not extend)
            "ifMatch": "string" | null,                                     // if-match is an optional ETag that can be passed for optimistic concurrency
            "entity": {
                ... MATCHING ENTITY...                                      // must match entity schema resource from the collection
            }                                                               // schema on entity is static and not dynamic
        },
    ]
}
```

- Bulk operation requests **MAY** be designated as `ATOMIC` or `ISOLATED` via the `transaction` field.
    - The default transaction type **MUST** be `ISOLATED`.
    - The transaction type **MAY** be optionally left out of the request schema in implementation.

>     - `ATOMIC` transactions will either succeed or fail together.

Author: Have a line earlier up more generically talking about times to return problem details error: 
```
System level errors may still result in a `500 (Internal Server Error)` response code where the request could not be processed or was prevented from trying specific operations.
```

>     - `ATOMIC` transactions will either succeed or fail together.

Reviewer: Ok, I did read that but did not make that association.  Sounds good 👍

    - `ISOLATED` transactions will allow for individual operations to succeed or fail independently.
- `operationId` **MAY** be used to associate the operation in the request with the resulting operation in the response. This is useful for tracking the outcome of each operation in the response where it might be ambiguous to reference via `entityId`.
- `action` enumeration **MUST NOT** be extended, but **MAY** be a subset of the enumeration values where not all actions are required.

> - `etag` **MUST** be used supported in the request schema if it is used for other RESTful operations on the same resource.

Reviewer 4: Might be a typo here from some renaming?
```suggestion
- `ifMatch` **MUST** be supported in the request schema if ETags are used for other RESTful operations on the same resource.
```

Author: totally! thanks.

> - Operation collections in a request **MAY** include entities of the same ID, in which case the operations are performed in the order they are received. In this case the use of `ETag` may not work as expected for subsequent concurrency checks. Operation ID should be used by consumer in this case to identify the outcome of each operation, especially if transaction type is `ISOLATED`.

Reviewer 4: I can live with this if this is the consensus and there's a use case for it. But it feels a little bad that allowing this is at odds with other request inputs and can make things a bit ambiguous.

What is the expected behavior if I give `ifMatch` values and the same entity multiple times? Does the API just ignore the `ifMatch`? Does the first succeed and the 2nd always fail? It seems like it would be cleaner if we just avoided this whole situation, but maybe it's necessary to support multiple updates instead of the client merging it themselves ahead of time?

Author: Based on prior conversation, the consensus did seem to be to allow for this. That being said, its always easier to NOT allow it now, and then allow it later from a compatibility perspective. I'm more inclined as you say to indicate its not allowed to keep things "clean". Based on your comment, I'm going to change this to indicate its not allowed. We can change it later if a use case presents itself that is beyond the theoritical.

                "message": "string",                                        // if detail object is provided, it must include a message
                "code": "string" | null,                                    // codes can be similar to those used in Error Response, or custom for other purposes
                "field": "string" | null,                                   // field indicates an associated field in the entity to highlight
                "value": "string" | null                                    // the value of the associated field highlighted in the detail
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

- `status` enumeration **MUST NOT** be extended or filtered.
- `operations` collection **SHOULD** be in the same order as the request body operations.
- `operationId` in the response **MUST** match the `operationId` of the request body where provided, otherwise it should fallback to the index of the operation in the request body as a string value.
- `entityId` and `entityRef` should both be used to identify the primary ID or an associated [ref](naming.md) value for the entity. These are optional and can be left out if not applicable.

> - `detail` field **MAY** be included as a complex object following the identified schema. If it is include, then it **MUST** include a `message` field. It **MUST NOT** be extended.

Reviewer 4: In our error response schema, isn't this part a list as there might be multiple validation errors each with their own error code indicating a specific problem? It looks like we have a single object here. Maybe that's on purpose to limit some complexity, but that means errors would need to be reported differently here than if the entity was acted on individually through a non-bulk endpoint.

Additionally, I thought `field` and `value` were example extended error context fields that weren't necessarily required or exhaustive. The way it's presented here is that they'd be mandatory in this bulk schema that is also deemed not extensible. Seems like this is a bit inconsistent too?

Author: Your suspicions was where my head was at writing this:
- Leaving it as a single detail object was intended to reduce complexity, especially in scenarios in my head where much of the validation of handling a single resource would be a single object. So you end up with many usages where detail is a collection of one.
- I expected that there were additional validation concerns that happen when using a resource directly around headers and other request validation issues that often resulted in validation having multiple messages / codes. Typically I'd bet we would find a non-exhaustive return of all possible validations, usually just being the first one that we fail on. Again, with that in mind, it was hard for me to get to making detail a collection all the time.
- field and error are examples of error extension, but enough of an example codified in a domain that if needed teams will copy that pattern. Here it is the same, though not extendable in order to lock it down until we have a real use case where something different is needed. I did make a comment though that if detail is provided, message must be provided, but the rest of the fields were optional on the resource as a whole (i.e. not dynamic schema for each operation). 

The duality you speak of between error validations for a 400 problem details and here are still rattling in my brain though. I'm wondering if if this should be specifically error context to tie together the same schema and collection of validation messages. A separate top string message field as a sibling to error context could provide the regular use case message (allowing error collection also to be null when no errors occurred). However, I had considered detail previously to be usable by both success and failure... for example to indicate the value of a new field on success - that might be way to theoritical though.

```json
{
    "status": "SUCCEEDED" | "FAILED" | "PARTIAL",                           
    "operations": [                                                         
        {
            "operationId": "string",                                        
            "action": "CREATE" | "UPDATE" | "CREATE_UPDATE" | "DELETE",     
            "entityId": "string" | null,                                    
            "entityRef": "sps-ref" | null,                                  
            "status": "SUCCEEDED" | "FAILED", 
            "result": {                                     // Details pertaining to the result of the operation. -> DO WE NEED THIS OR JUST PUT DETAIL/CONTEXT at ROOT of operation object?
                "detail": "string" | null,                  // Description or detailed human-readable message about the success or failure of the operation.            
                "context": [                                // OPTIONAL (array): List of objects providing additional context and detail on sub-reasons for any errors or failures.
                    {
                        "message": "string",                // REQUIRED (string): Human-readable details or message specific error about the request failure.                       
                        "code": "string" | null,            // OPTIONAL (string): Short, machine-readable, name of the validation error that occurred.                        
                        "field": "string" | null,                                   
                        "value": "string" | null 
                    }                                   
                ]
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

Thoughts?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I like the general idea/direction of that. The complexity is really around handling errors, not success, so that might deserve its own object that is just only used when there was an error. And since we already have a concept for that, I'd think we'd want some consistency. Curious what other folks think, though.

`status` could maybe move under `result` too since it's part of the output and not identifying the operation or request. But `status` does also feel like it should be a top-level thing for each operation where it is now. 🤔 

Or if we don't want to nest things as much, `detail` and `context` could probably be flatter on the object as you mentioned in comments - but maybe rename them to fit there a bit better or something?

Author: I like status in result. And while it is convenient at the root, I think having it in result is probably better of the two for grouping. Asking around a bit, there was a desire from others to keep context and detail for generic usage. The result of the operation itself as a success/failure isn't inherently a concern of the contract, its just about displaying the results.

Take a look at the update and let me know if you have strong opinions in either direction?

            }                                                            
        }
    ]
}
```

- Bulk operation requests **MAY** be designated as `ATOMIC` or `ISOLATED` via the `transactionMode` field.
    - The default transaction mode type **MUST** be `ISOLATED`.
    - The transaction mode type **MAY** be optionally left out of the request schema in implementation.
    - `ATOMIC` transactions will either succeed or fail together.
    - `ISOLATED` transactions will allow for individual operations to succeed or fail independently.
- `operationId` **MAY** be used to associate the operation in the request with the resulting operation in the response. This is useful for tracking the outcome of each operation in the response where it might be ambiguous to reference via `entityId`.
- `action` enumeration **MUST NOT** be extended, but **MAY** be a subset of the enumeration values where not all actions are required.
- `ifMatch` **MUST** be supported in the request schema if ETags are used for other RESTful operations on the same resource.

> - Operation collections in a request **INCLUDE** include entities of the same `id` only once. If the collection contains multiple entities with the same `id`, then the request **MUST** return a `400 Bad Request` status code and error body.

Reviewer 4: I think you probably meant this? or MUST NOT multiple times?
```suggestion
- Operation collections in a request **MUST** include entities of the same `id` only once. If the collection contains multiple entities with the same `id`, then the request **MUST** return a `400 Bad Request` status code and error body.
```

    "operations": [                                                         // REQUIRED (array): results of each operation from the request.
        {
            "operationId": "string",                                        // REQUIRED (string): matching operation id from the request body if provided, otherwise use index value as a string
            "action": "CREATE" | "UPDATE" | "CREATE_UPDATE" | "DELETE",     // REQUIRED (enum): repeat action type
            "entityId": "string" | null,                                    // OPTIONAL (string): the associated id of the entity, if available
            "entityRef": "sps-ref" | null,                                  // OPTIONAL (string): the associated sps-ref URN entity, if applicable
            "result": {                                                     // REQUIRED (object): result of the operation
                "status": "SUCCEEDED" | "FAILED",                           // REQUIRED (enum): status of individual operation
                "detail": "string" | null,                                  // OPTIONAL (string): Description or detailed human-readable message about the success or failure of the operation.

>                 "context": [                                                // OPTIONAL (array): List of objects providing additional context and detail on sub-reasons for any errors or failures.

Reviewer 4: Is `context` specific enough, or should this be something like `errorContext`? 🤔

Author: the intent was to make it generic to allow for error context or otherwise if needed.

Author: An example from Aaron for this is using the context for something like Log Messages  with may have a valid message/code, etc that makes it useful more generically as well.

            "entityId": "bfd8f0c0-be67-4f81-bf82-e55e552609f4",
            "entityRef": "sps:thing:bfd8f0c0-be67-4f81-bf82-e55e552609f4",
            "status": "SUCCEEDED",                         
            "detail": {
                "message": "Article was updated.",
                "code": null,
                "field": null,
                "value": null
            }
        },
        {
            "operationId": "my-unique-id-or-uuid",
            "action": "CREATE",
            "entityId": null,
            "entityRef": null,
            "status": "FAILED",                         
            "detail": {
                "message": "Could not create article, since the name already exists.",
                "code": "UNIQUE_NAME_VIOLATION",
                "field": "name",
                "value": "my name"
            }  
        },
        {
            "operationId": "2",
            "action": "DELETE",
            "entityId": "d9bd5d91-fc25-4410-ae42-c8f631e8e9ff",
            "entityRef": "sps:thing:d9bd5d91-fc25-4410-ae42-c8f631e8e9ff",
            "status": "SUCCEEDED",                         
            "detail": null
        }
    ]

> }

Reviewer 4: Looks like these examples are out of date now with the updated structure.

Author: wow :(  sorry Evan - been context switching way to much today and making sloppy mistakes. I appreciate your persistence in reviewing this for consistency!
